add tiup no-sudo doc (#20179)
pingcap/docs: tiup/tiup-cluster-no-sudo-mode.md

---
title: Deploy and Maintain an Online TiDB Cluster Using TiUP No-sudo Mode
summary: Learns how to deploy and maintain an online TiDB cluster using TiUP no-sudo mode.
---

# Deploy and Maintain an Online TiDB Cluster Using TiUP No-sudo Mode

This document describes how to use the TiUP no-sudo mode to deploy a cluster.

> **Note:**
>
> For CentOS, only CentOS 8 or later versions are supported.

## Prepare the user and configure the SSH mutual trust

> 1. Log in to all deployment target machines in sequence, and use the `root` user to create a user named `tidb` with the following command. In no-sudo mode, there is no need to configure password-free sudo for the `tidb` user, that is, there is no need to add the `tidb` user to sudoers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Log in to all deployment target machines in sequence, and use the `root` user to create a user named `tidb` with the following command. In no-sudo mode, there is no need to configure password-free sudo for the `tidb` user, that is, you do not need to add the `tidb` user to sudoers.
```

   
    ```shell
    adduser tidb
    ```
   

> 2. Start the `systemd` user mode for the `tidb` user on every deployment target machine. This step is important and do not skip it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Start the `systemd` user mode for the `tidb` user on every deployment target machine. This step is required and do not skip it.
```

    1. Use the `tidb` user to set the `XDG_RUNTIME_DIR` environment variable.
   

>        ```shell
>        mkdir -p ~/.bashrc.d
>        echo "export XDG_RUNTIME_DIR=/run/user/$(id -u)" > ~/.bashrc.d/systemd
>        source ~/.bashrc.d/systemd
>        ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        ```shell
        mkdir -p ~/.bashrc.d
        echo "export XDG_RUNTIME_DIR=/run/user/$(id -u)" > ~/.bashrc.d/systemd
        source ~/.bashrc.d/systemd
        ```
```

   
    2. Use `root` user to start user service.
   
        ```shell

>         $ systemctl start user@1000.service #1000 is the ID of the tidb user. You can get the user ID by executing ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        $ systemctl start user@1000.service ##`1000` is the ID of the tidb user. You can get the user ID by executing the `id` command.
```

        $ systemctl status user@1000.service
        user@1000.service - User Manager for UID 1000
        Loaded: loaded (/usr/lib/systemd/system/user@.service; static; vendor preset>
        Active: active (running) since Mon 2024-01-29 03:30:51 EST; 1min 7s ago
        Main PID: 3328 (systemd)
        Status: "Startup finished in 420ms."
        Tasks: 6
        Memory: 6.1M
        CGroup: /user.slice/user-1000.slice/user@1000.service
                ├─dbus.service
                │ └─3442 /usr/bin/dbus-daemon --session --address=systemd: --nofork >
                ├─init.scope
                │ ├─3328 /usr/lib/systemd/systemd --user
                │ └─3335 (sd-pam)
                └─pulseaudio.service
                  └─3358 /usr/bin/pulseaudio --daemonize=no --log-target=journal
        ```
   
    Execute `systemctl --user` in the terminal. If no errors are reported, it indicates that it has started normally.

> 3. Use ssh-keygen in the central control computer to generate a key and copy the public key to other deployment machines.

Reviewer 2: Compared with the Chinese version, the following is missed. Please check whether this is on purpose.

```
使用 `root` 用户执行以下命令，为 systemd 用户 `tidb` 启用驻留。

    ```bash
    loginctl enable-linger tidb
    ```
    更多详情，参见 [systemd 用户实例的自动启动](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Systemd/User#Automatic_start-up_of_systemd_user_instances)。
```

## Prepare the topology file

> 1. Use following command to generate topology file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Use the following command to generate topology file.
```

> 1. Use the following command to generate topology file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Execute the following command to generate the topology file.
```

    ```shell
    tiup cluster template > topology.yaml
    ```
   
2. Edit the topology file.

>     Compared with the previous mode, TiUP using no-sudo mode needs to add the line `systemd_mode: "user"` in the global block of topology.yaml. The `systemd_mode` parameter is used to indicate whether to use systemd user mode. If this parameter is not set, its default value is `system`, indicating that sudo permissions are required. In addition, no-sudo mode cannot use `/data` as `deploy_dir` and `data_dir` because it can cause permission issues. You need to choose a path that ordinary users can access. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     Compared with the previous mode, TiUP in no-sudo mode requires adding `systemd_mode: "user"` in the global block of `topology.yaml`. The `systemd_mode` parameter specifies whether to use systemd's user mode. If this parameter is not set, the default value is `system`, meaning sudo permissions are required. Additionally, in no-sudo mode, `/data` cannot be used as the `deploy_dir` or `data_di`r due to potential permission issues. You must select a path accessible to non-root users.
```

>      Compared with the previous mode, TiUP in no-sudo mode requires adding `systemd_mode: "user"` in the global block of `topology.yaml`. The `systemd_mode` parameter specifies whether to use systemd's user mode. If this parameter is not set, the default value is `system`, meaning sudo permissions are required. Additionally, in no-sudo mode, `/data` cannot be used as the `deploy_dir` or `data_di`r due to potential permission issues. You must select a path accessible to non-root users.
>    
>     The following example uses relative paths and the final paths used are `/home/tidb/data/tidb-deploy` and `/home/tidb/data/tidb-data`. The rest is the same as the old version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     Compared with the previous mode, TiUP in no-sudo mode requires adding `systemd_mode: "user"` in the global block of `topology.yaml`. The `systemd_mode` parameter specifies whether to use systemd's user mode. If this parameter is not set, the default value is `system`, meaning sudo permissions are required. 
     
     Additionally, in no-sudo mode, because the non-root user `tidb` has no permissions, `/data` cannot be used as the `deploy_dir` or `data_dir`. You must select a path accessible to non-root users. The following example uses relative paths and the final paths used are `/home/tidb/data/tidb-deploy` and `/home/tidb/data/tidb-data`. The rest is the same as the old version.
```

    ```yaml
    global:
      user: "tidb"
      systemd_mode: "user"
      ssh_port: 22
      deploy_dir: "data/tidb-deploy"
      data_dir: "data/tidb-data"
      arch: "amd64"
      ...
    ```
   
## Manually repair failed check items

> Executing `tiup cluster check topology.yaml --user tidb` will display some failed check items. The following is an example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Executing `tiup cluster check topology.yaml --user tidb` will generate some failed check items. The following is an example.
```

```shell
Node            Check         Result  Message
----            -----         ------  -------
192.168.124.27  thp           Fail    THP is enabled, please disable it for best performance
192.168.124.27  command       Pass    numactl: policy: default
192.168.124.27  os-version    Pass    OS is CentOS Stream 8 
192.168.124.27  network       Pass    network speed of ens160 is 10000MB
192.168.124.27  disk          Warn    mount point / does not have 'noatime' option set
192.168.124.27  disk          Fail    multiple components tikv:/home/blackcat/data/tidb-deploy/tikv-20160/data/tidb-data,tikv:/home/blackcat/data/tidb-deploy/tikv-20161/data/tidb-data are using the same partition 192.168.124.27:/ as data dir
192.168.124.27  selinux       Pass    SELinux is disabled
192.168.124.27  cpu-cores     Pass    number of CPU cores / threads: 16
192.168.124.27  cpu-governor  Warn    Unable to determine current CPU frequency governor policy
192.168.124.27  swap          Warn    swap is enabled, please disable it for best performance
192.168.124.27  memory        Pass    memory size is 9681MB
192.168.124.27  service       Fail    service firewalld is running but should be stopped
```

> Because in no-sudo mode, the `tidb` user does not have sudo permissions, executing `tiup cluster check topology.yaml --apply --user tidb` will not be able to automatically repair failed check items due to insufficient permissions. Therefore, some operations need to be performed manually on the deployment machines using the `root` user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In no-sudo mode, the `tidb` user lacks sudo permissions, so running `tiup cluster check topology.yaml --apply --user tidb` cannot automatically fix failed check items due to insufficient permissions. As a result, certain operations must be performed manually on the deployment machines using the `root` user.
```

1. Install the numactl tool.

    ```shell
    sudo yum -y install numactl
    ```
   
2. Close swap.

    ```shell
    swapoff -a || exit 0
    ```
   
3. Disable transparent huge pages.

    ```shell
    echo never > /sys/kernel/mm/transparent_hugepage/enabled
    ```

> 4. Start the irqbalance service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Start the `irqbalance` service.
```

    ```shell
   systemctl start irqbalance
    ```
   
5. Disable the firewall and disable firewall auto-start.

    ```shell
    systemctl stop firewalld.service
    systemctl disable firewalld.service
    ```
   
6. Modify sysctl parameters.
   
    ```shell
    echo "fs.file-max = 1000000">> /etc/sysctl.conf
    echo "net.core.somaxconn = 32768">> /etc/sysctl.conf
    echo "net.ipv4.tcp_tw_recycle = 0">> /etc/sysctl.conf
    echo "net.ipv4.tcp_syncookies = 0">> /etc/sysctl.conf
    echo "vm.overcommit_memory = 1">> /etc/sysctl.conf
    echo "vm.swappiness = 0">> /etc/sysctl.conf
    sysctl -p
    ```
   

> 7. Configure the user's `limits.conf` file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Configure the user's `limits.conf` file.
```

> 7. Configure the user's limits.conf file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Configure the user's `limits.conf` file
```

    ```shell
    cat << EOF >>/etc/security/limits.conf
    tidb           soft    nofile          1000000
    tidb           hard    nofile          1000000
    tidb           soft    stack           32768
    tidb           hard    stack           32768
    tidb           soft    core            unlimited
    tidb           hard    core            unlimited
    EOF
    ```

## Deploy the cluster

> To use the `tidb` user created in the previous steps and avoid creating a new one, add `--user tidb` when running the deploy command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the `tidb` user created in the previous steps and avoid creating a new one, add `--user tidb` when running the `deploy` command.
```

```shell
tiup cluster deploy mycluster v8.1.0 topology.yaml --user tidb
```

Start the cluster:

```shell
tiup cluster start mycluster
```

Scale out the cluster:

```shell
tiup cluster scale-out mycluster scale.yaml --user tidb
```

Scale in the cluster:

```shell
tiup cluster scale-in mycluster -N 192.168.124.27:20160
```

Upgrade the cluster:

```shell
tiup cluster upgrade mycluster v8.2.0
```

## FAQ

### When you start user@.service, the following error occurs: `Failed to fully start up daemon: Permission denied`

This issue might be caused by the absence of `pam_systemd.so` in your `/etc/pam.d/system-auth.ued` file.

> To resolve this issue, use the following command to check if the `/etc/pam.d/system-auth.ued` file contains the `pam_systemd.so` module . If not, append `session optional pam_systemd.so` to the end of the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To resolve this issue, use the following command to check if the `/etc/pam.d/system-auth.ued` file contains the `pam_systemd.so` module. If not, append `session optional pam_systemd.so` to the end of the file.
```

> This issue might be caused by the missing `pam_systemd.so` from your `/etc/pam.d/system-auth.ued` file. 
> 
> To address this issue, you can use the following command to check whether the `/etc/pam.d/system-auth.ued` file already contains the configuration of the `pam_systemd.so` module. If not, append the line `session optional pam_systemd.so` to the end of the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This issue might be caused by the absence of `pam_systemd.so` in your `/etc/pam.d/system-auth.ued` file.

To resolve this issue, use the following command to check if the `/etc/pam.d/system-auth.ued` file contains the `pam_systemd.so` module . If not, append `session optional pam_systemd.so` to the end of the file.
```

---
title: Deploy and Maintain an Online TiDB Cluster Using TiUP No-sudo Mode
summary: Learn how to deploy and maintain an online TiDB cluster using the TiUP no-sudo mode.
---

# Deploy and Maintain an Online TiDB Cluster Using TiUP No-sudo Mode

This document describes how to use the TiUP no-sudo mode to deploy a cluster.

> **Note:**
>
> For CentOS, only CentOS 8 or later versions are supported.

## Prepare the user and configure the SSH mutual trust

1. Take the `tidb` user as an example. Log in to all the target machines and create a user named `tidb` using the `root` user with the following command. In no-sudo mode, configuring passwordless sudo for the `tidb` user is unnecessary, that is, you do not need to add the `tidb` user to the `sudoers` file.
   
    ```shell
    adduser tidb
    ```
   

> 2. Start the `systemd` user mode for the `tidb` user on each target machine. This step is required and do not skip it.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Start the `systemd user` mode for the `tidb` user on each target machine. This step is required and do not skip it.
```

    1. Use the `tidb` user to set the `XDG_RUNTIME_DIR` environment variable.
   
        ```shell
        mkdir -p ~/.bashrc.d
        echo "export XDG_RUNTIME_DIR=/run/user/$(id -u)" > ~/.bashrc.d/systemd
        source ~/.bashrc.d/systemd
        ```
   

>     2. Use `root` user to start user service.

Author: ```suggestion
    2. Use  the `root` user to start user service.
```

   
        ```shell
        $ systemctl start user@1000.service # `1000` is the ID of the tidb user. You can get the user ID by executing the `id` command.
        $ systemctl status user@1000.service
        user@1000.service - User Manager for UID 1000
        Loaded: loaded (/usr/lib/systemd/system/user@.service; static; vendor preset>
        Active: active (running) since Mon 2024-01-29 03:30:51 EST; 1min 7s ago
        Main PID: 3328 (systemd)
        Status: "Startup finished in 420ms."
        Tasks: 6
        Memory: 6.1M
        CGroup: /user.slice/user-1000.slice/user@1000.service
                ├─dbus.service
                │ └─3442 /usr/bin/dbus-daemon --session --address=systemd: --nofork >
                ├─init.scope
                │ ├─3328 /usr/lib/systemd/systemd --user
                │ └─3335 (sd-pam)
                └─pulseaudio.service
                  └─3358 /usr/bin/pulseaudio --daemonize=no --log-target=journal
        ```
       

>        Execute `systemctl --user` in the terminal. If no errors are reported, it indicates that it has started normally.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    3. Execute `systemctl --user`. If no errors occur, it indicates that the `systemd` user mode has started successfully.
```

>     3. Use `root` user to execute the following command to enable lingering for the systemd user instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. Use the `root` user to execute the following command to enable lingering for the systemd user `tidb`.
```

>     3. Use the `root` user to execute the following command to enable lingering for the systemd user `tidb`.
> 
>         ```shell
>         loginctl enable-linger tidb
>         ```
> 
>         You can read the systemd documentation for reference, [Automatic start-up of systemd user instances](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Systemd/User#Automatic_start-up_of_systemd_user_instances).
> 
> 3. Use ssh-keygen in the central control computer to generate a key and copy the public key to other deployment machines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Use the `root` user to execute the following command to enable lingering for the systemd user `tidb`.

    ```shell
    loginctl enable-linger tidb
    ```

    You can read the systemd documentation for reference, [Automatic start-up of systemd user instances](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Systemd/User#Automatic_start-up_of_systemd_user_instances).

4. Use ssh-keygen in the central control computer to generate a key and copy the public key to other deployment machines.
```

## Prepare the topology file

1. Execute the following command to generate the topology file.

    ```shell
    tiup cluster template > topology.yaml
    ```
   
2. Edit the topology file.

>     Compared with the previous mode, TiUP in no-sudo mode requires adding `systemd_mode: "user"` in the global block of `topology.yaml`. The `systemd_mode` parameter specifies whether to use systemd's user mode. If this parameter is not set, the default value is `system`, meaning sudo permissions are required. 
> 
>     Additionally, in no-sudo mode, because the non-root user `tidb` has no required permissions, `/data` cannot be used as the `deploy_dir` or `data_dir`. You must select a path accessible to non-root users. The following example uses relative paths and the final paths used are `/home/tidb/data/tidb-deploy` and `/home/tidb/data/tidb-data`. The rest is the same as the old version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Compared with the previous mode, when using TiUP in no-sudo mode, you need to add a line `systemd_mode: "user"` in the `global` module of the `topology.yaml` file. The `systemd_mode` parameter is used to set whether to use the `systemd user` mode. If this parameter is not set, the default value is `system`, meaning sudo permissions are required.

    Additionally, in no-sudo mode, because the non-root `tidb` user does not have permission to use the `/data` directory as `deploy_dir` or `data_dir`, you must select a path accessible to non-root users. The following example uses relative paths and the final paths used are `/home/tidb/data/tidb-deploy` and `/home/tidb/data/tidb-data`. The rest of the topology file remains the same as in the previous mode.
```

    ```yaml
    global:
      user: "tidb"
      systemd_mode: "user"
      ssh_port: 22
      deploy_dir: "data/tidb-deploy"
      data_dir: "data/tidb-data"
      arch: "amd64"
      ...
    ```
   
## Manually repair failed check items

> Executing `tiup cluster check topology.yaml --user tidb` will generate some failed check items. The following is an example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Executing `tiup cluster check topology.yaml --user tidb` can generate some failed check items. The following is an example.
```

```shell
Node            Check         Result  Message
----            -----         ------  -------
192.168.124.27  thp           Fail    THP is enabled, please disable it for best performance
192.168.124.27  command       Pass    numactl: policy: default
192.168.124.27  os-version    Pass    OS is CentOS Stream 8 
192.168.124.27  network       Pass    network speed of ens160 is 10000MB
192.168.124.27  disk          Warn    mount point / does not have 'noatime' option set
192.168.124.27  disk          Fail    multiple components tikv:/home/blackcat/data/tidb-deploy/tikv-20160/data/tidb-data,tikv:/home/blackcat/data/tidb-deploy/tikv-20161/data/tidb-data are using the same partition 192.168.124.27:/ as data dir
192.168.124.27  selinux       Pass    SELinux is disabled
192.168.124.27  cpu-cores     Pass    number of CPU cores / threads: 16
192.168.124.27  cpu-governor  Warn    Unable to determine current CPU frequency governor policy
192.168.124.27  swap          Warn    swap is enabled, please disable it for best performance
192.168.124.27  memory        Pass    memory size is 9681MB
192.168.124.27  service       Fail    service firewalld is running but should be stopped
```

> In no-sudo mode, the `tidb` user lacks sudo permissions, so running `tiup cluster check topology.yaml --apply --user tidb` can cause failed check items that cannot be automatically fixed due to insufficient permissions. You need to perform operations manually on the deployment machines using the `root` user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In no-sudo mode, the `tidb` user does not have sudo permissions. As a result, running `tiup cluster check topology.yaml --apply --user tidb` cannot automatically fix the failed check items. You need to manually perform the following steps using the `root` user on the target machines:
```

1. Install the numactl tool.

    ```shell
    sudo yum -y install numactl
    ```
   
2. Close swap.

    ```shell
    swapoff -a || exit 0
    ```
   
3. Disable transparent huge pages.

    ```shell
    echo never > /sys/kernel/mm/transparent_hugepage/enabled
    ```

4. Start the `irqbalance` service.

    ```shell

>    systemctl start irqbalance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    systemctl start irqbalance
```

    ```
   

> 5. Disable the firewall and disable firewall auto-start.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Stop the firewall and disable firewall auto-start.
```

    ```shell
    systemctl stop firewalld.service
    systemctl disable firewalld.service
    ```
   
6. Modify sysctl parameters.
   
    ```shell
    echo "fs.file-max = 1000000">> /etc/sysctl.conf
    echo "net.core.somaxconn = 32768">> /etc/sysctl.conf
    echo "net.ipv4.tcp_tw_recycle = 0">> /etc/sysctl.conf
    echo "net.ipv4.tcp_syncookies = 0">> /etc/sysctl.conf
    echo "vm.overcommit_memory = 1">> /etc/sysctl.conf
    echo "vm.swappiness = 0">> /etc/sysctl.conf
    sysctl -p
    ```
   
7. Configure the user's `limits.conf` file.

    ```shell
    cat << EOF >>/etc/security/limits.conf
    tidb           soft    nofile          1000000
    tidb           hard    nofile          1000000
    tidb           soft    stack           32768
    tidb           hard    stack           32768
    tidb           soft    core            unlimited
    tidb           hard    core            unlimited
    EOF
    ```

## Deploy and manage the cluster

> To use the `tidb` user created in the previous steps and avoid creating a new one, add `--user tidb` when running the `deploy` command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use the `tidb` user created in preceding steps and avoid creating a new one, add `--user tidb` when running the following `deploy` command:
```

```shell
tiup cluster deploy mycluster v8.1.0 topology.yaml --user tidb
```

Start the cluster:

```shell
tiup cluster start mycluster
```

Scale out the cluster:

```shell
tiup cluster scale-out mycluster scale.yaml --user tidb
```

Scale in the cluster:

```shell
tiup cluster scale-in mycluster -N 192.168.124.27:20160
```

Upgrade the cluster:

```shell
tiup cluster upgrade mycluster v8.2.0
```

## FAQ

> ### When you start user@.service, the following error occurs: `Trying to run as user instance, but $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR is not set.`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### The `Trying to run as user instance, but $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR is not set.` error occurs when starting user@.service
```

This issue might be caused by the absence of `pam_systemd.so` in your `/etc/pam.d/system-auth.ued` file.

> To resolve this issue, use the following command to check if the `/etc/pam.d/system-auth.ued` file contains the `pam_systemd.so` module. If not, append `session optional pam_systemd.so` to the end of the file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To resolve this issue, use the following command to check whether the `/etc/pam.d/system-auth.ued` file contains the `pam_systemd.so` module. If not, append `session optional pam_systemd.so` to the end of the file.
```
